Tullus Aufidius then had madenew head?
He had, my lord,
and that it was which caused ourswifter composition.
So then the Volsces stand but asat first,
ready, when time shall promptthem,
to make road upon us again.
They are worn, lord consul,
so that we shall hardly in ourages
see their banners wave again.
Saw you Aufidius?
On safeguard he came to me
and did curse against theVolsces,
for they had so vilely yieldedthe town.
He's retired to Antium.
Spoke he of me?
He did, my lord.
How; what?
How often he had met you, swordto sword;
that of all things upon theearth,
he hated your person most;
that he would pawn all hisfortunes
to hopeless restitution
so he might be called yourvanquisher.
At Antium lives he?
At Antium.
I wish I had a cause to seek himthere
to oppose his hatred fully.
Welcome home.
Behold, these are the tribunesof the people,
the tongues of common mouth.
I do despise them for they doprank them in authority
against all noble sufferance.
Pass no further.
Ha, what is that?
It will be dangerous to go on.
No further.
What makes this change?
The matter?
Hath he not passed the noble andthe common?
Cominius, no.
Have I had children's voices?
Tribunes, give way; he shall tothe marketplace.
The people are incensed againsthim.
Stop or all will fall in broil.
Are these your herd?
Must these have voices that canyield them now
and straight disclaim theirtongues?
What are your offices?
You being their mouths, why ruleyou not their teeth?
Have you not set them on?
Be calm; be calm.
It is a purposed thing and growsby plot
to curb the will of thenobility.
Suffer it and live with such ascannot rule
nor ever will be ruled.
Call it not a plot.
The people cry you mocked them,
and of late, when corn was giventhem gratis,
you repined,
scandaled the suppliants for thepeople,
called them time-pleasers,flatterers, foes to nobleness.
Why, this was known before.
Not to them all.
Have you informed them sithence?
How I inform them?
You are like to do suchbusiness.
Not unlike, each way, to betteryours.
Why then should I be consul?
By yond clouds, let me deserveso ill as you
and make me your fellow tribune.
You show too much of that forwhich the people stir.
If you will pass to where youare bound,
you must inquire your way,
which you are out of, with agentler spirit,
or never be so noble as aconsul,
nor yoke with him for tribune.
Let's be calm.
The people are abused, set on.
This paltering becomes not Rome,
nor hath Coriolanus deservedthis so dishonored rub
laid falsely in the plain way ofhis merit.
Tell me of corn.
This was my speech, and I willspeak it againó
Not now; not now.
Not in this heat, sir, now.
Now, as I live, I will.
My nobler friends, I crave theirpardon.
For the mutable, rank-scentedmany,
let them regard me as I do notflatter
and therein behold themselves.
I say, again, in soothing them,
we nourish against our senatethe cockle of rebellion,
insolence, sedition,
which we ourselves have ploughedfor, sowed, and scattered,
by mingling them with us, thehonored number,
who lack not virtue, no, norpower,
but that which they have givento beggars.
Well, no more.
No more words, we beseech you.
How no more?
As for my country, I have shedmy blood,
not fearing outward force,
so shall my lungs coin words
till their decay against thosemeasles,
which we disdain, should tatterus,
yet sought the very way to catchthem.
You speak of the people as ifyou were a god to punish,
not a man of their infirmity.
'Twere well we let the peopleknow it.
What; what?
His choler?
Choler.
Were I as patient as themidnight sleep,
by Jove, 'twould be my mind.
It is a mind that shall remain apoison where it is,
not poison any further.
Shall remain?
Hear you this, Triton of theminnows.
Mark you his absolute "shall"?
'Twas from the canon.
"Shall"?
O, good but most unwisepatricians.
Why, you grave but recklesssenators,
have you thus given Hydra hereto choose an officer,
that with his peremptory"shall,"
being but the horn and noise ofthe monster's,
wants not spirit to say
he'll turn your current in aditch
and make your channel his?
If he have power, then vail yourignorance;
if none, awake your dangerouslenity.
You are plebeians if they besenators,
and they are no less when, bothyour voices blended,
the greatest taste most palatestheirs.
They choose their magistrate,
and such a one as he who putshis "shall,"
his popular "shall,"
against a graver bench than everfrowned in Greece.
By Jove himself, it makes theconsuls base.
And my soul aches to know
when two authorities are up,neither supreme,
how soon confusion may enter'twixt the gap of both
and take the one by the other.
Well, on to the marketplace.
Whoever gave that counsel,
to give forth the corn of thestorehouse gratis,
as 'twas used sometime inGreeceó
Well, well, no more of that.
Though there the people had moreabsolute power, I say,
they nourished disobedience andfed the ruin of the state.
Why shall the people give onethat speaks thus their voice?
I'll give my reasons, moreworthier than their voices.
They know the corn was not ourrecompense,
resting well assured they ne'erdid service for it.
Being pressed to the war,
even when the navel of the statewas touched,
they would not thread the gate.
This kind of service did notdeserve corn gratis.
Being in the war, their mutiniesand revolts,
wherein they showed most valor,spoke not for them.
Well, what then?
How shall this bosom multiplieddigest the senate's courtesy?
Let deeds express what's like tobe their words.
"We did request it.
"We are the greater poll, and intrue fear,
they gave us our demand."
Thus we debase the nature of ourseat
and make the rabble call ourcares fears,
which will in time break ope'the locks of the senate
and bring in the crows to peckthe eagles.
Come, enough.
Enough with over-measure.
No, take more.
What may be sworn by both divineand human
seal what I end withal.
This double worship,
where one part does disdain withcause,
the other insult without allreason,
where gentry, title, wisdom,
cannot conclude
but by the yea and no of generalignorance.
It must omit real necessities
and give way the while tounstable slightness.
Purpose so barred, it follows,nothing is done to purpose.
Therefore, beseech you,
you that will be less fearfulthan discreet,
that love the fundamental partof state
more than you doubt the changeon it,
that prefer a noble life beforea long,
that wish to jump a body with adangerous physic
that's sure of death without it,
at once pluck out themultitudinous tongue.
Let them not lick the sweetwhich is their poison.
Your dishonor mangles truejudgment
and bereaves the state of thatintegrity
which should become it,
not having the power to do thegood it would,
for the ill which doth controlit.
Has said enough.
Hath spoken like a traitor andshall answer as traitors do.
Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelmthee.
What should the people do withthese bald tribunes
on whom depending,
their obedience fails to thegreater bench?
In a rebellion, when what's notmeet,
but what must be was law, thenwere they chosen.
In a better hour,
let what is meet be said it mustbe meet,
and throw their power i' thedust.
Manifest treason.
This a consul?
No.
Aediles, ho.
Go, call the people,
in whose name myself attach theeas a traitorous innovator,
a foe to the public weal.
Obey, I charge thee, and followto thine answer.
Hence, old goat.
Hence, rotten thing,
or I'll shake thy bones out ofthy garments.
Help, ye citizens!
Here's he that would take fromyou all your power.
Seize him, aediles.
Down with him!
Hear me.
Hear me, people; peace.
You are at point to lose yourliberties.
Marcius would have all from you,
Marcius, whom late you havenamed for consul.
Fie, fie, fie.
This is the way to kindle not toquench.
To unbuild the city and to layall flat.
What is the city but the people?
True, the people are the city.
By the consent of all,
we were established the people'smagistrates.
You so remain.
And so are like to do.
That is the way to lay the cityflat,
to bring the roof to thefoundation and bury all,
which yet distinctly ranges inheaps and piles of ruin.
This deserves death.
Or let us stand to ourauthority,
or let us lose it.
We do here pronounce, upon thepart of the people,
in whose power we were electedtheirs,
Marcius is worthy of presentdeath.
Therefore lay hold of him,
bear him to the rock Tarpeian,
and from thence into destructioncast him!
Aediles, seize him.
Beseech you, tribunes!
Hear me but a word.
Be that you seem truly yourcountry's friend,
and temperately proceed
in what you would thus violentlyredress.
Sir, those cold ways that seemlike prudent helps
are very poisonous where thedisease is violent.
Lay hands upon him and bear himto the rock.
No.
I'll die here.
There's some among you havebeheld me fighting.
Come;
try upon yourselves what youhave seen me.
Down with that sword.
Tribunes, withdraw awhile.
Go, get you to your house; begone.
Come, sir, along with us.
I would they were barbarians asthey are,
though in Rome littered notRomans as they are not,
though calved in the porch ofthe Capitol
Be gone.
Put not your worthy rage intoyour tongue.
One time will owe another.
On fair ground, I could beat 40of them.
Please, you, be gone.
I'll try whether my old wit bein request
with those that have but little.
This must be patched with clothof any color.
Nay, come away.
This man has marred his fortune.
Where is this viper that woulddepopulate the city
and be every man himself?
You worthy tribunesó
He shall be thrown down theTarpeian rock
with rigorous hands.
He hath resisted law,
and therefore law shall scornhim further trial
than the severity of the publicpower
which he so sets at nought.
Sir, sir, do not cry havoc
where you should but hunt withmodest warrant.
Sir, how comes it that you haveholp to make this rescue?
Hear me speak.
As I do know the consul'sworthiness,
so can I name his faultsó
Consul; what consul?
The consul Coriolanus.
He consul?
If, by the tribunes' leave, andyours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave aword or two,
the which shall turn you to nofurther harm
than so much loss of time.
Speak briefly then,
for we are peremptory todispatch
this viperous traitor.
To eject him hence were but ourdanger
and to keep him here our certaindeath.
Therefore, it is decreed, hedies tonight.
Now the good gods forbid thatour renowned Rome,
whose gratitude towards herdeserved children
is enrolled in Jove's own book,
like an unnatural dam should noweat up her own.
He's a disease that must be cutaway.
O, he's a limb that has but adisease.
This is clean kam.
We'll hear no more.
Pursue him to his house andpluck him thence
lest his infection, being ofcatching nature,
spread further.
One word more.
One word.
This tiger-footed rage,
when it shall find the harm ofunscanned swiftness,
will too late tie leaden poundsto his heels.
Proceed by process.
Lest parties, as he is beloved,break out
and sack great Rome with Romans.
If it were so
What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of hisobedience?
Our aediles smote?
Ourselves resisted?
Come.
Consider this.
He has been bred in the warssince he could draw a sword
and is ill schooled in boltedlanguage.
Meal and bran together he throwswithout distinction.
Give me leave.
I'll go to him
and undertake to bring him wherehe shall answer,
by a lawful form, in peace, tohis utmost peril.
Noble tribunes, it is the humaneway.
The other course will prove toobloody
and the end of it unknown to thebeginning.
Noble Menenius, be you then asthe people's officer.
Masters, lay down your weapons.
Go not home.
Meet on the marketplace.
We'll attend you there
where if you bring not Marcius,
we'll proceed in our first way.
I'll bring him to you.
Let them pull all about mineears,
present me death on the wheel orat wild horses' heels,
or pile ten hills on theTarpeian rock
that the precipitation
might down stretch below thebeam of sight,
yet will I still be thus tothem.
Why did you wish me milder?
Would you have me false to mynature?
Rather say I play the man I am.
O, sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put yourpower well on
before you'd worn it out.
Let go.
You might have been enough theman you are
with striving less to be so.
Lesser had been the thwartingsof your dispositions
if you'd not showed them how youwere disposed
ere they lacked power to crossyou.
Let them hang.
Ay, and burn too.
Come, come, you have been toorough, something too rough.
You must return and mend it.
There's no remedy, unless, bynot so doing,
our good city cleave in themidst and perish.
O, pray, be counseled.
I have a heart as little apt asyours
but yet a brain
that leads my use of anger tobetter vantage.
Well said, noble woman.
Before he should thus stoop tothe herd
but that the violent fit of thetime
craves it as physic for thewhole state,
I would put mine armor on, whichI can scarcely bear.
What must I do?
Return to the tribunes.
Well, what then; what then?
Repent what you have spoke.
For them?
I cannot do it to the gods; mustI then do it to them?
You are too absolute;
though therein you can never betoo noble
but when extremities speak.
I have heard you say honor andpolicy,
like unsevered friends,
in the war do grow together.
Grant that, and tell me in peace
what each of them by the otherlose
that they combine not there.
Tush, tush.
A good demand.
If it be honor in your wars toseem the same you are not,
which, for your best ends, youadopt your policy,
how is it less or worse that itshould hold
companionship in peace withhonor, as in war,
since that to both it stands inlike request?
Why force you this?
Because that now it lies you onto speak to the people,
not by your own instruction,
nor by the matter which yourheart prompts you,
but with such words that are butrooted in your tongue,
though but bastards andsyllables of no allowance
to your bosom's truth.
Now, this no more dishonors youat all
than to take in a town withgentle words
which else would put you to yourfortune
and the hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my naturewhere my fortunes
and my friends at stake requiredI should do so in honor.
I am in this your wife,
your son, these senators, thenobles.
And you will rather show ourgeneral louts
how you can frown than spend afawn upon them
for the inheritance of theirloves
and safeguard of what that wantmight ruin.
Noble lady.
Come, go with us; speak fair.
You may salve so not what isdangerous present,
but the loss of what is past.
I prithee now, my son,
go to them with thy bonnet inthy hand,
and thus far having stretchedit,
here be with them.
This but done, even as shespeaks,
why, their hearts were yours.
Here is Cominius.
I have been in the marketplace,
and, sir, 'tis fit you makestrong party
or defend yourself by calmnessor by absence.
All's in anger.
Only fair speech.
I think 'twill serve,
if he can thereto frame hisspirit.
He must and will.
Prithee now; say you will and goabout it.
Must I go show them my unbarbedsconce?
Must I, with my base tongue,give to my noble heart
a lie that it must bear?
Well, I will do it.
But were there but this singleplot to lose,
this mold of Marcius,
they to dust should grind it andthrow it against the wind.
To the marketplace.
You have put me now to such apart
that never shall I discharge tothe life.
Come, come; we'll prompt you.
I prithee now, my son, as thouhast said,
my praises made thee first asoldier,
so to have my praise for this,
perform a part thou hast notdone before.
Well, I must do it.
Away, my disposition.
Possess me some harlot's spirit.
My throat of war be turned,
which, quired with my drum, intoa pipe small as an eunuch
or the virgin voice that babieslull asleep.
The smiles of knaves tent in mycheeks,
and schoolboys' tears take upthe glasses of my sight.
I will not do it,
lest I surcease to honor mineown truth
and by my body's action
teach my mind a most inherentbaseness.
At thy choice then.
To beg of thee,
it is my more disgrace than thouof them.
Come all to ruin.
Let thy mother rather feel thypride
than fear thy dangerousstoutness,
for I mock at death with as bigheart as thou.
Do as thou list.
Thy valiantness was mine.
Thou suck'dst it from me.
But owe thy pride thyself.
Pray, be content.
Mother, I am going to themarketplace.
Chide me no more.
I'll mountebank their loves andcog their hearts from them
and come home beloved of all thetrades in Rome.
Look, I am going.
Commend me to my wife.
I'll return consul,
or never trust to what my tonguecan do
i' the way of flattery further.
Do your will.
In this point charge him home,
that he affects tyrannicalpower.
If he evade us there,
enforce him with his envy to thepeople,
and that the spoil got on theAntiates
was ne'er distributed.
What, will he come?
- He's coming. - Howaccompanied?
With old Menenius
and those senators that alwaysfavored him.
Have you a catalog of all thevoices
that we have procured set downby the poll?
I have; 'tis ready.
Have you collected them bytribes?
I have.
Assemble presently the peoplehither,
and when they hear me say,
"It shall be so in the right andstrength of the commons,"
be it either for death, forfine, or banishment,
then let them,
if I say fine, cry "Fine," ifdeath, cry "Death,"
insisting on the old prerogative
and power in the truth of thecause.
I shall inform them.
And when such time they havebegun to cry,
let them not cease,
but with a din confused enforcethe present execution
of what we chance to sentence.
Very well.
Make them be strong and readyfor this hint
when we shall hap to give itthem.
Go about it.
Put him to choler straight.
He hath been used ever toconquer
and to have his worth ofcontradiction.
Being once chafed,
he cannot be reined again totemperance.
Then he speaks what's in hisheart,
and that is there which lookswith us to break his neck.
Well, here he comes.
Calmly, I do beseech you.
Ay, as an ostler, that for thepoorest piece
will bear the knave by thevolume.
The honored gods keep Rome insafety,
her chairs of justice suppliedwith worthy men,
plant love among us,
and throng our large templeswith the shows of peace
and not our streets with war.
Amen, amen.
A noble wish.
Shall I be charged no furtherthan this present?
Must all determine here?
I do demand,
if you submit you to thepeople's voices,
allow their officers,
and are content to suffer lawfulcensure
for such faults as shall beproved upon you?
I...
am content.
Lo, citizens, he says he iscontent.
The warlike service he has done,consider.
Think upon the wounds his bodybears,
which show like graves in theholy churchyard.
Scratches with briers;
scars to move laughter only.
Consider further that when hespeaks not like a citizen,
you find him like a soldier.
Do not take his rougher accentsfor malicious sounds,
but, as I say,
such as become a soldier ratherthan envy you.
What is the matter
that being passed for consulwith full voice,
I am so dishonored
that the very hour you take itoff again?
Answer to us.
Say, then.
'Tis true.
I ought so.
We charge you that you
have contrived to take from Romeall seasoned office
and to wind yourself into apower tyrannical,
for which you are a traitor tothe people.
How, traitor?
Nay, temperately; your promise.
The fires i' the lowest hellfold in the people.
Call me their traitor.
Thou injurious tribune.
Within thine eyes sat 20,000deaths,
in thy hands clutched as manymillions,
in thy lying tongue bothnumbers.
I would say, "Thou liest," untothee
with a voice as free as I dopray the gods.
Mark you this, people?
We need not put new matter tohis charge.
What you have seen him do andheard him speak,
beating your officers, cursingyourselves,
opposing laws with strokes
and here defying those whosegreat power must try him;
even this, so criminal and insuch capital kind,
deserves the extremest death.
But since he hath served wellfor Romeó
What do you prate of service?
I talk of that that know it.
You?
Is this the promise that youmade your mother?
- Know, I pray you - I'll knowno further.
Let them pronounce the steepTarpeian death,
vagabond exile, flaying,
pent to linger but with a graina day.
I would not buy their mercy atthe price of one fair word.
For that he has, as much as inhim lies,
from time to time envied againstthe people,
seeking means to pluck awaytheir power,
as now at last given hostilestrokes,
and that not in the presence ofdreaded justice,
but on the ministers that dodistribute it,
in the name of the people
and in the power of us, thetribunes,
we, even from this instant,banish him our city,
in peril of precipitation fromoff the rock Tarpeian
never more to enter our Romegates.
In the people's name, I say itshall be so.
Hear me, my masters and mycommon friends
He's sentenced; no more hearing.
Let me speak.
I have been consul
and can show for Rome herenemies' marks upon me.
I do love my country's good witha respect more tender,
more holy and profound than mineown life,
my dear wife's estimate, herwomb's increase,
and treasure of my loins; thenif I would speak tható
We know your drift; speak what?
There's no more to be said,
but he is banished as enemy tothe people and his country.
It shall be so.
It shall be so; it shall be so.
You common cry of curs
whose breath I hate as reek ofthe rotten fens,
whose loves I prize
as the dead carcasses ofunburied men
that do corrupt my air,
I banish you
and here remain with youruncertainty.
Let every feeble rumor shakeyour hearts.
Your enemies, with nodding oftheir plumes,
fan you into despair.
Have the power still to banishyour defenders
till at length your ignorance,which finds not till it feels,
deliver you as most abatedcaptives to some nation
that won you without blows.
Despising for you, the city,
thus I turn my back.
There is a world elsewhere.
Come, leave your tears.
A brief farewell.
The beast with many heads buttsme away.
Nay, mother, where is yourancient courage?
You were used to say extremitieswas the trier of spirits;
that common chances common mencould bear;
that when the sea was calm,
all boats alike showedmastership in floating.
You were used to load me withprecepts
that would make invincible theheart that conned them.
O, heavens; O, heavens.
Nay, good woman
Now the red pestilence strikeall trades in Rome
and occupations perish.
What, what, what?
I shall be loved when I amlacked.
Nay, good mother.
Resume that spirit when you werewont to say
if you had been the wife ofHercules,
six of his labors you'd havedone
and saved your husband so muchsweat.
Thy tears are salter than ayounger man's
and venomous to thine eyes.
My sometime general, I have seenthee stern
and thou hast oft beheldheart-hardening spectacles.
Tell these sad women
'tis fond to wail inevitablestrokes
as 'tis to laugh at them.
My mother,
you wot well my hazards stillhave been your solace.
and believed, not lightly,though I go alone,
like to a lonely dragon,
that his fen makes feared andtalked of more than seen.
Your son will or exceed thecommon
or be caught with cautelousbaits and practice.
My first son.
Whither wilt thou go?
Take good Cominius with theeawhile.
Determine on some course
more than a wild exposture toeach chance
that starts in the way beforethee.
O, the gods.
I'll follow thee a month,
devise with thee where thoushalt rest,
that thou shalt hear of us andwe of thee,
so if the time thrust forth acause for thy repeal,
we shall not send over the vastworld
to seek a single man and loseadvantage,
which doth ever cool in theabsence of the needer.
O, fare ye well.
Thou hast years upon thee.
Thou art too full of the wars'surfeits
to go rove with one that's yetunbruised.
Bring me but out at gate.
Come now, my sweet wife, mydearest mother,
and my friends of nobler touch.
When I am forth, bid me farewelland smile.
I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground,you shall hear from me still
and never of me aught but whatis like me
formerly.
Pray, come.